 	
 
 
PRESS RELEASE 
 
POLICE BODY CAMERA FOOTAGE SHOWS MAYOR  
DIRECTED ARREST OF PEACEFUL BGE PROTESTORS  
 
Police response to BGE request in stark contrast to lack of response in Brooklyn Homes a week later 
 
BALTIMORE. April 3, 2024. 
 
Today at 12 PM, at 111 S. Calvert Street (19th Floor), Democratic mayoral candidate and former 
Deputy Attorney General Thiru Vignarajah will join the three women arrested at BGE’s direction — Maggie Fitzsimmons, Sandy Seward, and Claudia Towles — who will each share their thoughts on newly-released police body camera video that shows police and an elected official confirming that the decision to arrest peaceful protestors was made by Mayor Brandon Scott.  
 
This never-before-seen video footage shows the massive police response at the behest of BGE to peaceful protesters in Federal Hill on June 22, 2023, in stark contrast to the documented lack of any response by police when citizens called for police assistance ten days later before the worst mass shooting in Baltimore history on July 2, 2023, as confirmed with by the Baltimore Police Department’s own After-Action Report, which will be discussed at the press conference.  
 
The footage also reveals the reluctance of police to make the arrests, noting that there are other public safety priorities including juveniles committing robberies and dirt bike riders that police were ignoring while devoting an entire day to arresting “senior citizens.” The video shows police worrying the damage to police credibility but being directed to proceed with the arrests: “They’ll say Baltimore Police have nothing better to do, cannot arrest juveniles who do robberies or guys on dirt bikes but they can do this. Oh man, we lose out on this deal arresting a group of senior citizens.”  
 
The footage also confirms that BGE called the police, that Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) Faith Leach granted BGE extended hours to shut off the gas, that Councilman Eric Costello consulted with the Mayor and CAO about the decision in a private phone call before the decision was made, and that BGE’s position was relayed to the police and City Hall by BGE General Counsel, who previously served as Acting City Solicitor.  
 
Short clips from the footage can be viewed here. A longer video of critical excerpts will be shared at the press conference. Please confirm attendance so building security can be advised; the full video is available upon request to all media that attend on the condition that it is embargoed until after the conclusion of the press conference.  
 
 
By Authority of Friends of Thiru Vignarajah | Treasurer Sandra Seward 