1. Describe your vision of a healthy, safe, equitable transportation system for Baltimore City and the roles walking, biking, and public transportation play in that vision. 
It is incomprehensible that in 2020 our city remains reliant on automobiles for transit. We’re a city bereft of affordable options for transportation, particularly in communities with stagnant job growth.  
As Mayor, a day-one priority for my administration will be to immediately expand the free bus system to provide transit options along the major East-West corridors of the city. The city's free transit system—the Charm City Circulator—is designed by Visit Baltimore (a 501c6 with municipal and corporate partners, designed specifically to market the city—not to provide public transit). We need to reform the purpose of the Circulator to specifically target riders lacking alternative transit options. Expanding free circulator routes to East-West corridors and major​	 arterial road ways like Pennsylvania Ave and Hartford Rd is meant to lay the groundwork for a citywide free public bus system. A free bus network could reduce commute times and make the city significantly more accessible. Atop the conversation of increased equity is increased ridership and its ability to boost city commerce. When Denver and Austin made transit fare-free, it resulted in an increase in ridership of 20-60% within the first few months. Improved ridership means fewer cars on the road and more foot traffic in commercial districts, which increases more street-level commerce. 
The decision to kill the Red Line was not simply a transportation decision—it prevented economic opportunities for tens of thousands of Baltimoreans. While I will do everything in my power to restart a Red Line 2.0 with the goal of completion by 2028, I will immediately start a free East to West, West to East bus system. Currently, our East to West avenues are dedicated to motor traffic—in a city built for over a million with close to now only 600,000 residents, we can reimagine our transit grid and adopt innovative planning and policy using models from cities across the country and around the world as guidance.  
Public transit systems have been linked to lower rates of automobile accidents, which killed 511 people in Maryland last year. The US Department of Transportation found cars account for over 75% of transportation fatalities nationwide, while buses accounted for less than one percent of motor vehicle fatalities. 
Even as we push for safe public transit, we will also strive to improve safety features at bus stops and improve riders' experiences, including accurate maps with timetables so people know how long they're waiting, and bus shelters at every stop to make travel more feasible during inclement weather, particularly for the elderly and children. 
As detailed further in Question 5, departing from an automobile-centric transit model for Baltimore will lead to significant health benefits for our residents. 
2. The fastest and most economical way to address climate change, improve public health, and create equal access to opportunity is to design a city that reduces dependence on private automobiles. What are the biggest barriers to getting people to choose walking, biking, or public transit instead of personal vehicles, and what would you do to address these impediments? 
Access to transit is a massive hurdle for Baltimore residents. My administration will expand active transit options in the city by building bike lanes and promoting bike use. Some of these initiatives will take time and require a cultural shift; however, we will explore new and exisitng​	 policies to breaking the status-quo such as expanding “Ride Your Bike to Work Day” campaigns, pursuing tax incentives for commuting bicyclists to local businesses similar to those outlined in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in 2018, and collaborating with organizations already doing great work to spur bike advocacy and ridership like Bikemore, B360, and the Baltimore Youth Kinetic Energy Collective.  
In the short term, we intend to expand e-scooter access. To ensure equitable distribution of scooters across the city, we will insert a requirement in new contracts that subsidized scooters be available at the same scale in transportation deserts as they are downtown. While we expand our public transit options, city-wide scooter access will be significant in addressing Baltimore’s first and last mile transit issues. Companies that decide to enter the Baltimore market will be required to partner with City Hall to map where transit deserts are, and to ensure that the organic movement and replacement of scooters and bikes is equitable at the end of each day, as was required in the initial six month partnership with Lime and Bird. 
As scooter populations boom, we need to work to keep the streets safer for riders and to hold scooter companies accountable when necessary. As Mayor, I will push to establish new default speed limits for cars on arterial and non-arterial roads. To keep scooter companies accountable, we will push to include clauses in contracts guaranteeing that companies will be held solely responsible for retrieving vandalized or broken scooters, will repair scooters to ensure safety standards, and will be held liable for any injury caused by a malfunction in the scooter itself. 
Right now, the public transit options do not run reliable or efficiently. For buses, LocalLinks (low-frequency) buses are only on-time 68% of the time. Extrapolating that out, commuters have a 68% chance of being on time for work. High-frequency buses (CityLink) have a 73% chance of being on time which is still far less than ideal. The implementation of technology based monitoring including accurate, easily accessible timetables, and a user-friendly app will facilitate efficient operation and help increase ridership.  
3. In 2017, the Planning Commission approved the Separated Bike Lane Network plan that connects 85% of Baltimore’s neighborhoods by creating safe, protected places to ride a bike. Do you agree with the plan’s recommendations, and if so, what would you do to ensure that we fulfill the plan’s promise to build a minimum of 17 miles of bike lanes per year? Are there specific areas of the city where you would prioritize implementation? 
Yes. I would leverage the existing ‘Low Stress Streets’ network to seamlessly integrate the Separated Bike Lane Network into our transit grid. 
I would follow the plan’s proposal to create connection corridors over the next five years, but I would first direct the Planning Department to review the plan to ensure that the priority areas for are based on three identifiers: 1) places where low stress bicycle access can offset low car ownership, 2) areas that will provide residential access to transit lines that are presently dangerous or nonexistent, and 3) the size of the influence area based on the Planning Commission’s approved plan.  
4. Approximately 50 people are killed on city streets each year while walking, biking, or driving, with another 9,000 people injured. What is your plan to reduce the number of Baltimoreans injured and killed in traffic every year? 
As Mayor, Baltimore will join the Vision Zero network of cities in the US committed to eliminating all traffic fatalities. The Department of Finance, Department of Planning, Department of Transportation, and Health Department will be brought together monthly to coordinate on transit developments regarding roadway design, speed management, and new technology that will influence our roads. We will establish a new default arterial speed limit and a default non-arterial speed limit, further enforcing the protection of bike lanes, bus lanes and our ‘Block the Box’ laws. 
We will embrace Complete Streets redesign as a standard, and will provide enough resources for the Department of Transportation to actually implement it.  
I also support implementing barrier-protected bike and walking paths, like The Big Jump that Bikemore advocated for on Druid Lake Park Drive, which make areas more accessible and safe for pedestrians, cyclists, and wheelchair users. 
5. Approximately 800 Baltimoreans die early every year from preventable diseases related to carbon emissions,more than double the city’s murder rate. Thousands more are hospitalized each year as these emissions trigger asthma and other respiratory diseases. 
There is a strong correlation between hospitalization and proximity to major car commuter routes. What is your plan to reduce carbon emissions from automobiles in order to decrease the number of Baltimoreans hurt by and dying from emissions-related diseases? 
I plan to invest in transit expansion in a sustainable, environmentally-conscious manner. As discussed, I intend to repurpose one of the avenues exclusively for public and green transportation.  
Shifting the city’s focus away from an automobile-centric model has clear health benefits from decreased emissions. In their study, EXHALE, the CDC demonstrated that public transportation systems can reduce the amount of air pollution from motor vehicles by taking cars off the road. For every passenger mile traveled, buses produce only five percent as much carbon monoxide, less than 8% as many volatile organic compounds, and nearly half as much CO2 and nitrogen oxides as cars. 
Utilizers of public transit will also receive the added benefits of being more likely to experience physical activity throughout the day—anywhere from 8 to 33 minutes of walking daily—improving cardiovascular health. Studies from the American Public Transportation Association have found that the cleaner air and lifestyle that comes with improving rapid transit services translate to per capita annual health benefits of $355. 
We will provide free East-West busses, bike lanes, and pedestrian passages along this avenue. The elimination of cars from this passage would improve the safety of bicyclists and pedestrians by simply reducing the volume of traffic. The concentrated motor traffic on the remaining avenues would likely result in increased travel time. The free and green transit options would see a corresponding increase in popularity as the faster and cheaper option causing a natural reduction in motor transportation and air pollution—all of which will be paid for by the increase in revenues from increased employment. My vision is that we quickly demonstrate demand for East-West transit to restart the Red Line 2.0 and then expand the free bus lines to the major arteries criss crossing the city.  
6. Do you walk for transportation? If so, for what purposes, how often, and what was your last trip walking? 
I walk in and around the Federal Hill neighborhood to meet friends, for breakfasts and dinners, and to run errands. I only walk for commuting when I work out of my law firm’s downtown office. I commute by car when working out of the firm’s Mount Washington office. And of course, during the span of the political campaign I have walked neighborhoods all across Baltimore as part of our campaign’s expansive door-knocking efforts. Just this past weekend, we spent the day walking all through Waverly and Ednor Gardens.  
7. Do you use public transportation? If so, for what purposes, how often, and what was your last trip by public transportation? 
I use public transit infrequently in Baltimore. Most recently, I have used the Circulator to and from the downtown area. 
Baltimore’s inadequate transit grid is only highlighted because of my time living elsewhere. When I lived in New York City, I did not have and did not need a car because I relied on a functional transit system every day for work and personal purposes. When I lived in London, I did not have and did not need a car because London, like many other European cities, has a highly functional public transit system, and walking and biking is an integrated part of the culture. There are clear models that can dramatically reduce our reliance on personal vehicles and increase our commitment to public transportation, but these models require a comprehensive plan and investment in infrastructure. As Mayor, moving towards a modern, functional, environmentally-conscious public transit grid will be a top priority.  
Do you ever ride a bicycle? Is it for transportation, recreation, or both? What was your last trip by bicycle? 
Not since living in London have I relied on biking for daily transportation. Cycling, however, has been a form of recreation for me since I was a little kid. Because of my current schedule, it is a less regular part of my life now, but it remains a valued form of recreation periodically on weekends.  
Baltimore’s urban areas have limited space on streets. In order to increase safety and improve mobility, some modes of transportation must be prioritized over others to make the most of this limited space. Please rank how you would prioritize different modes of transportation on city streets, using numbers 1 through 7: 
 
Walking & devices that aid people with a disability 
Public Transportation 
Bicycles and Scooters 
Personal Automobiles 
Freight and Delivery 
Parking 
Ride Hailing Services (Taxi, Uber, Lyft) 
 
I support removing parking on a street if it would improve safety and increase mobility of people using that street. Agree 
Minimum parking requirements are shown to increase housing costs while limiting potential density and making neighborhoods less walkable. I support following the lead of other cities that have removed minimum parking requirements from new development. 
 
[skip], comment: This determination must be made on a case by case basis 
Some cities require employers that subsidize parking also offer an option for employees to receive that subsidy as a cash payment. I support a mandate that employers offer parking cash- out so that employees can choose to pocket that money, use it for alternative transportation, or continue using that cash to pay for parking. 
[skip], comment: Employers should provide public transit subsidies alongside any efforts to subsidize parking. 
Increasing density in areas of opportunity is proven to help individuals escape poverty. 
I support taller, denser, or larger buildings in areas that are now prohibited by zoning. Skip, comment: This too should be decided on a case by case basis. 
Transit oriented development can expand access to areas of opportunity by locating housing and retail along high frequency transit. Current zoning code only identifies these zones along subway and lightrail routes. I support expanded Transit Oriented 
Development zoning to include areas within a quarter mile of high-frequency bus routes. 
Agree, Charlotte provides an instructive example of why the increased economic activity and​	 positive outcomes in low-income neighborhoods warrants the change. 
It is now widely accepted that Single Family Residential Zoning was historically created to maintain racial segregation. I support removing Single Family Residential Zoning categories, allowing both single family and multi family residences to be built in all residential zoning areas. 
[Skip]​	 
I support allowing existing residences to be split into apartments in all zoning categories without having to pass legislation for each conversion, increasing density in neighborhoods that were traditionally single family homes. 
 
Agree Provided that the additional units are high-quality affordable housing options passing all​	 necessary safety regulations.  
At 20mph, 90% of pedestrians survive being hit by a car. At 40mph, only 10% survive. I support enforcing a maximum speed limit of 25 mph on arterial streets, and 20 mph on local streets. 
Disagree, However, as Mayor, I will direct the DoT to work with community groups to determine appropriate speed limits for our major arterial streets and local streets. 
Allowing turns on red is a contributing factor in increased pedestrian injury and death. 
I support banning turns on red at all intersections that allow pedestrian crossing. 
Disagree 
Automated Speed and Red Light Enforcement Cameras are widely proven to reduce fatal collisions. I support using these cameras on any street, not just near schools and construction sites. 
Disagree - These red light camera programs tend to disadvantage low-income neighborhoods.  
The Automated Speed Enforcement Camera current threshold is 12 miles per hour. I support cameras being able to issue citations for those traveling 5 miles per hour or more over the speed limit. 
Disagree 
I would invest in automated enforcement cameras that will issue citations to private automobiles for being stopped or parked in bus lanes. 
Agree - Technology is a valuable complement to enforcement in this area. 
Dedicated bus lanes and bus boarding islands are proven to dramatically improve bus reliability and boarding times. I support removing parking or travel lanes to create bus lanes and boarding islands to improve bus performance. Agree 
The city adopted the Greenway Trails Network plan that will connect existing trails such as Gwynns Falls Trail and Herring Run Trail to create a 35-mile trail loop that connects 80% of Baltimore’s neighborhoods to greenspace and recreational trails. I support the construction of these trail connections, even if it requires using grass medians or taking road space or parking space away from private automobiles. 
Agree 